Notification / messaging guidelines (#693)
primer/design: content/ui-patterns/messaging.mdx

(image here)

**Awareness**: Communicates information that is relevant to the user but not necessarily related to an action they've taken. This type of message is typically used to provide context or additional information about a feature or product. A **Banner** using the `info` state might be used to suggest an action or helpful tip, while a **Popover** is typically used to announce a new feature.

(image here)

## Message states

<img
  width="960"
  alt="A group of labels showing the proper icon and color combination for each message state"
  src="https://github.com/primer/css/assets/18661030/41d3a706-9aa3-4f05-8bad-5176f49a7d5d"
/>

Messaging components combine state with message type to provide the appropriate level of prominence. To determine which component to use for your message, start by identifying the message state.

### Overview

| State | Use case |
|--------|--------|

> | <Box sx={{color: 'accent.fg', display: 'flex', alignItems: 'center', gap: '0.5rem'}}><InfoIcon /><span>Info</span></Box> | Use to highlight important information that has an influence on the current view or offers an action |

Author: ```suggestion
| <Box sx={{color: 'accent.fg', display: 'flex', alignItems: 'center', gap: '0.5rem'}}><InfoIcon /><span>Info</span></Box> | Provides important information that has an influence on the current view or offers an action |
```

> | <Box sx={{color: 'success.fg', display: 'flex', alignItems: 'center', gap: '0.5rem'}}><CheckCircleIcon /><span>Success</span></Box> | Informs about successfully completing action. |

Author: ```suggestion
| <Box sx={{color: 'success.fg', display: 'flex', alignItems: 'center', gap: '0.5rem'}}><CheckCircleIcon /><span>Success</span></Box> | Informs about successfully completed action. |
```

> | <Box sx={{color: 'attention.fg', display: 'flex', alignItems: 'center', gap: '0.5rem'}}><StopIcon /><span>Warning</span></Box> | Warn users of side-effect of an action they are about to take or if something happens they may not know about which results in a specific state |

Author: ```suggestion
| <Box sx={{color: 'attention.fg', display: 'flex', alignItems: 'center', gap: '0.5rem'}}><StopIcon /><span>Warning</span></Box> | Informs users of a possibly unexpected result of an action they are about to take |
```

> | <Box sx={{color: 'danger.fg', display: 'flex', alignItems: 'center', gap: '0.5rem'}}><AlertIcon /><span>Critical</span></Box> | Inform user about an error that occurs or an action they are about to perform that results in lost access or content |

Author: ```suggestion
| <Box sx={{color: 'danger.fg', display: 'flex', alignItems: 'center', gap: '0.5rem'}}><AlertIcon /><span>Critical</span></Box> | Informs about an error that occurs or warns about loss of access or data as a result of an action |
```

(image here)

**Awareness**: Communicates information that is relevant to the user but not necessarily related to an action they've taken. This type of message is typically used to provide context or additional information about a feature or product. A **Callout** might be used to suggest an action or helpful tip, while a **Popover** is typically used to announce a new feature.

(image here)

## Message states

<img
  width="960"
  alt="A group of labels showing the proper icon and color combination for each message state"
  src="https://github.com/primer/css/assets/18661030/41d3a706-9aa3-4f05-8bad-5176f49a7d5d"
/>

Messaging components combine state with message type to provide the appropriate level of prominence. To determine which component to use for your message, start by identifying the message state. From there, follow the decision tree to pick a component best suited for your use case.

### Info

Use the `info` state to highlight messages that help users complete a task or that provide additional context. This state is only used for information that is not critical to the user's experience.

Examples:
- a setting that impacts the current view

> - a nudge towards a new feature

Author: ```suggestion
```

A marketing banner should be used instead.

> - a process is in progress

Author: I assume you are referring to the last point:

> - a process is in progress

If a loading spinner works, this is preferred. But sometimes there may be a need to show a message as well. Either one that includes the loading spinner or if the process is running for a long time and the user may leave the page and come back. In those cases, `info` would be the correct state.

Maybe you have an idea of how to better write this?

> - a process is in progress

Reviewer: I don't think I've ever seen an interstitial page at GitHub 😆 we'll try and add an image for this one

> - a process is in progress

Reviewer 2: [a video showing the process of forking a repository](https://github.com/primer/design/assets/118266/1fb73030-23f9-44b4-aacf-5117384e7445)

- single sign on to access data

<img
  width="960"
  alt="draft wip"
  src="https://github.com/primer/css/assets/18661030/3fa52b6d-7e33-4f27-b0ec-d836375fe21a"
/>

(image of banner in context)
(image of callout in context)

### Warning

Use the `warning` state to inform users of a potential issue, an important upcoming change that may impact their experience or a potentially unexpected consequence of an action.

Examples:
- an account setting will become required soon
- a degraded experience(link) due to connectivity or GitHub availability

> - a non-destructive action with side-effects like costs or access changes is about to take place

Author: Yes.

> - a non-destructive action with side-effects like costs or access changes is about to take place

Reviewer 2: Should we guide people towards a confirmation dialog, over a banner, then?

> - a non-destructive action with side-effects like costs or access changes is about to take place

Author: No here I think. A confirmation dialog may be good, but it may also not be the right choice depending on the situation.

<img
  width="960"
  alt="draft wip"
  src="https://github.com/primer/css/assets/18661030/ae82693a-e18c-425f-9f63-e2077012e76b"
/>

(image of banner in context)
(image of callout in context)
(image of announcement in context)

### Success

> Use the `success` state to notify users that the results of an action were successful if it is not apparent from the UI.

Author: I feel this is not the correct page for this kind of guidance. If we have this somewhere or add this (great idea) we could link it.

However it is not always possible to make it apparent in the UI.

Examples:

> - saving an account setting if its otherwise not clear the save has taken place

Author: This is not always simple, e.g. when saving on a settings page with a text field, we don't redirect. So, it visually looks the same after the save.

I am actually not sure this really is poor UX or to put it a different way, I have no immediate solution that is better.

- an issue has been transferred successfully

<img
  width="960"
  alt="draft wip"
  src="https://github.com/primer/css/assets/18661030/a3612e09-97b2-4ff5-903a-e85d1587ce50"
/>

(image of banner in context)
(image of inline message in context)

### Unavailable

Reserve the `unavailable` state for **inline** system related degraded experiences.

Examples:
- a row of a data table could not be loaded
- an item in a list could not be loaded

See [degraded experiences](./degraded-experiences) for more information.

### Critical

Use the `critical` state to notify users that the results of an action were unsuccessful, or to inform that an action is destructive. This state is typically used for form errors and confirmation dialogs.

Examples:

> - form field is invalid upon submitting

Reviewer 2: This is a validation error, no? This should be presented as an inline validation error, no?

Author: Yes, that is what we are talking about here. Inline validation error == inline message of type `critical`

> - a delete or transfer button

Reviewer 2: Irreversible actions should use a modal dialog. I dont think this is applicable.

Author: Yes, but there may be a warning banner within the dialog which would use the state `critical`.

Author: Partly yes, but if you have a Dialog with other content 
you don't want to add a confirmation dialog on top.

I think this depends on the situation. I feel like the new deletion dialog is a bit to non-critical and could profit from a banner inside the dialog or at least a critical button

![CleanShot 2024-01-18 at 15 55 39@2x](https://github.com/primer/design/assets/813754/6de1d07b-e38f-41e1-84e5-b2e67c88e0a7)

Reviewer 2: This one is a bit of an odd example because actually clicking that button will show another critical dialog, then a _third_ critical dialog, followed by a request for re-auth.

Author: Oh, great. 
> Are you really, really, really sure you want to delete it?

But this does not mean the modal should not have a critical banner mentioning that this will delete your project.

The idea is that it pulls you out of just clicking (which people tend to do when there is a popup with a button). The red banner makes you focus for a sec to make sure you actually know what you are doing.

**System updates**: These types of message originate from GitHub and are not user initiated. A global site wide announcement (outage, missing payment details, critical and blocking) or messaging related to user account/permissions should use the **Announcement** component. System announcements related to a specific product area such as a single sign-on message should use the **Banner** component. System update type messages cannot be dismissed until the issue is resolved, or may be perminent if they are purely informative and not critical.

(image here)

**Feedback**: Communicates the result of a user action (submitting a form, toggling a setting, etc.) Feedback can be positive, negative, or a warning. Feedback is shown in either a **Banner** or **Inline message**. For forms, an inline message is used for individual field validation which may be combined with a banner if multiple fields have errors. Banners are placed at the top of the page or section they are related to, but still within the body content. Inline messages are placed near the action they are related to.

(image here)

> **Awareness**: Communicates information that is relevant to the user but not necessarily related to an action they've taken. This type of message is typically used to provide context or additional information about a feature or product. A **Callout** might be used to suggest an action or helpful tip, while a **Popover** is typically used to announce a new feature.

Reviewer 3: I'm wondering if `Banner` would also fall under this category? It's not totally clear to me what the distinction is between an informative announcement that relates to a specific product area (system update), and something for awareness about a feature or product.

Reviewer: Having images here will make it more clear I think, but a Callout is just a less prominent (visually) Banner. But I'll see if I can make the language more clear as well.

(image here)

## Message states

<img
  width="960"
  alt="A group of labels showing the proper icon and color combination for each message state"
  src="https://github.com/primer/css/assets/18661030/41d3a706-9aa3-4f05-8bad-5176f49a7d5d"
/>

### Info

> Use the `info` state to highlight messaging that may help the user complete a task or provide additional context. This state is typically used for informational purposes and is not critical to the user's experience.

Author: ```suggestion
Use the `info` state to highlight messages that help users complete a task or that provide additional context. This state is only used for information that is not critical to the user's experience.
```

Trying to simplify the text and make it even more precise with little room for subjectivity.

Examples:
- a setting that impacts the current view

> - nudge towards a new feature

Author: ```suggestion
- information about a new feature
```

> - a non blocking action to unlock additional features

Author: ```suggestion
- a non-blocking action to unlock additional features
```

@langermank what is this supposed to mean? What is an action that unlocks additional features?

Author: Also, should we include visual examples as well? I think this would make it easier to understand. (We can create those once we are set on the examples).

Reviewer: Trying to account for inline banners in account settings that are like.. if you do X, you will have access to Y feature. I think I saw some examples of this in our audit 😆 agree this is not very clear and images will help

### Warning

> Use the `warning` state to inform users of a potential issue or action that may impact their experience.

Author: ```suggestion
Use the `warning` state to inform users of a potential issue or consequence that may impact their experience.
```

Not sure if this is perfect, but it seems like the action does not impact the experience, right?

Examples:

> - an upcoming account setting will become required soon

Author: ```suggestion
- an account setting will become required soon
```

> - a degraded experience(link) due to connectivity or GitHub availability

Author: ```suggestion
```

In your loom you suggested to remove this, right? @langermank

Reviewer: Ah, no, we use `warning` for that but never `critical`

> - a non destructive action is about to take place

Author: I feel this is too vague. How about this:

```suggestion
- a non-destructive action with side-effects like costs or access changes is about to take place
``` 

Not 100% sure about it. Open for a better alternative.

### Success

> Use the `success` state to notify users that the results of an action were successful.

Author: ```suggestion
Use the `success` state to notify users that the results of an action were successful if it is not apparent from the UI.
```

Should we maybe clarify this so that people don't add success messages everywhere?

Examples:
- saving an account setting if its otherwise not clear the save has taken place
- an issue has been transferred successfully

### Unavailable

Reserve the `unavailable` state for **inline** system related degraded experiences (see docs for more information).

Examples:
- a row of a data table could not be loaded
- an item in a list could not be loaded

### Critical

> Use the `critical` state to notify users that the results of an action were unsuccessful, or to inform that an action is destructive. This state is typically used for form errors and confirmation dialogs.

Author: ```suggestion
Use the `critical` state to notify users that the results of an action were unsuccessful, to display form errors, or to inform that an action is destructive.
```

I feel this removes some duplication as _confirmation dialogs_ would have to be specified more which would be about destructive actions again.

Primer includes three different messaging components:

- Announcement
- [Banner](../components/flash)
- [Popover](../components/popover)
- Toast

> - Callout

Reviewer 4: I would say that Callout is not a way to notify users, it's about emphasizing content. I would mention it as part of Banner and refer to it, but wouldn't want to confuse to use it for notifications (unless this page continues to be about all things messaging but it's getting a lot).

/>

(image of banner in context)
(image of callout in context)

### Warning

Use the `warning` state to inform users of a potential issue, an important upcoming change that may impact their experience or a potentially unexpected consequence of an action.

Examples:
- an account setting will become required soon
- a degraded experience(link) due to connectivity or GitHub availability
- a non-destructive action with side-effects like costs or access changes is about to take place

<img
  width="960"
  alt="draft wip"
  src="https://github.com/primer/css/assets/18661030/ae82693a-e18c-425f-9f63-e2077012e76b"
/>

(image of banner in context)
(image of callout in context)
(image of announcement in context)

### Success

Use the `success` state to notify users that the results of an action were successful if it is not apparent from the UI.

Examples:
- saving an account setting if its otherwise not clear the save has taken place
- an issue has been transferred successfully

<img
  width="960"
  alt="draft wip"
  src="https://github.com/primer/css/assets/18661030/a3612e09-97b2-4ff5-903a-e85d1587ce50"
/>

(image of banner in context)
(image of inline message in context)

> ### Unavailable

Reviewer: I don't agree that this is not related to messaging. I think it makes sense to at least mention it in these docs and link to degraded experience docs, as I have below.

> ### Unavailable

Reviewer 2: We might not need explicit UI elements to show it though. Visual treatment could be added to existing UI to show that data has failed to fetch (e.g. we use spinners to show data is loading, we could provide a new UI pattern that shows data has failed to load that is similar to a spinner, such as an X) - such treatment would be discrete from a banner, and more specific.

Primer includes three different messaging components:

- Announcement
- [Banner](../components/flash)
- [Popover](../components/popover)
- Toast
- Callout
- Inline message

## Message types

Messaging holds differing levels of prominence, which can be used to determine the appropriate component to use. Most messages fall into one of the following categories, from most prominent to least:

**System updates**: These types of message originate from GitHub and are not user initiated. A global site wide announcement (outage, missing payment details, critical and blocking) or messaging related to user account/permissions should use the **Announcement** component. System announcements related to a specific product area such as a single sign-on message should use the **Banner** component. System update type messages cannot be dismissed until the issue is resolved, or may be perminent if they are purely informative and not critical.

(image here)

> **Feedback**: Communicates the result of a user action (subitting a form, toggling a setting, etc.) Feedback can be positive, negative, or a warning.Feedback is shown in either a **Banner** or **Inline message**. For forms, an inline message is used for individual field validation which may be combined with a banner if multiple fields have errors. Banners are typically placed near the top of the page, but still within the body content. Inline messages are placed near the action they are related to.

Author: ```suggestion
**Feedback**: Communicates the result of a user action (subitting a form, toggling a setting, etc.) Feedback can be positive, negative, or a warning. Feedback is shown in either a **Banner** or **Inline message**. For forms, an inline message is used for individual field validation which may be combined with a banner if multiple fields have errors. Banners are typically placed near the top of the page, but still within the body content. Inline messages are placed near the action they are related to.
```

> **Feedback**: Communicates the result of a user action (subitting a form, toggling a setting, etc.) Feedback can be positive, negative, or a warning. Feedback is shown in either a **Banner** or **Inline message**. For forms, an inline message is used for individual field validation which may be combined with a banner if multiple fields have errors. Banners are typically placed near the top of the page, but still within the body content. Inline messages are placed near the action they are related to.

Author: ```suggestion
**Feedback**: Communicates the result of a user action (submitting a form, toggling a setting, etc.) Feedback can be positive, negative, or a warning. Feedback is shown in either a **Banner** or **Inline message**. For forms, an inline message is used for individual field validation which may be combined with a banner if multiple fields have errors. Banners are placed at the top of the page or section they are related to, but still within the body content. Inline messages are placed near the action they are related to.
```

@langermank I added the section part here, does this make sense?

(image here)

> **Awareness**: Communicates information that is relevant to the user but not necessarily related to an action they've taken. This type of message is typically used to provide context or additional information about a feature or product. A **Callout** might be used to suggest an action or helpful tip, while a **Popover** is typically used to announce a new feature and offers a link to learn more.

Author: ```suggestion
**Awareness**: Communicates information that is relevant to the user but not necessarily related to an action they've taken. This type of message is typically used to provide context or additional information about a feature or product. A **Callout** might be used to suggest an action or helpful tip, while a **Popover** is typically used to announce a new feature.
```

> **Awareness**: Communicates information that is relevant to the user but not necessarily related to an action they've taken. This type of message is typically used to provide context or additional information about a feature or product. A **Callout** might be used to suggest an action or helpful tip, while a **Popover** is typically used to announce a new feature and offers a link to learn more.

Reviewer 3: Should we warn that Callout and Banners usage should be reserved/limited on a page? 

Plaintext can be used for most information. There's also, just a typical plaintext [form caption](https://primer.style/ui-patterns/forms/overview#caption) for providing supplementary information.

Author: Maybe. I could see some guidelines like this:
- avoid using callouts and banners next to each other if possible
- never use multiple callouts after each other

I don't really know how we could create a rule to create a hard limit. I think guidelines is the best we can do, but please let me know if you have ideas for more precise rules.

Reviewer 3: Hmm yeah, I'm not quite what the precise rule should be, but I like your suggested guidelines to start with!

On the tooling side, we could consider creating a custom axe rule that flags when there's like.. more than X number of callouts and banners on a given page, or when there are directly adjacent banners/callouts in the DOM.

(image here)

## Message states

### Info
The info state should be used to provide additional information that when missed to not prevent users from performing their desired actions.
An info may be:
- a setting that impacts the current view
- a feature that is now available for you
- additional details about a section or action that are more important than normal

### Warning
The warning state should be used if a user action is required prevent a problem in the future. Additionally if information is provided that is very important so that missing this information may lead to unwanted consequences.
A warning can be:
- 2FA will be required soon and the users is not using it
- performing this action will have drastic effects e.g. deleting or archiving a repo, etc.
- performing an action will incur costs for the first time
- the system is experiencing temporary problems that impact the quality of service but do not make working completly impossible

> ### Error

Reviewer 3: I've seen "danger"/red variant used to communicate when an action is super destructive or something needs immediate attention. Is that appropriate, and would that fall under this state?

Author: Good question.

One the one side, _technically_ it would be invalid because it is not an error state it is a warning state.
On the other side it is a pattern our users have grown accustomed too, so it may be dangerous to change this.

@langermank what do you think?

I feel like it would make sense to extend this definition to include _destructive actions_, this is also why we use the danger button, which is red as well.
